[Dark Wizard]
Let the Harfoots be your sole concern.
I will see to the Istar myself.
The Dark Wizard found his staff.
The time has come for you to find yours.
Unless there is somewhere else
you wish to be.
Nori.
[screams]
Unless I find her soon, she will die.
Both of them will die.
Your friend or your destiny?
The choice is yours.
[Prince Durin IV]
There's something under the mines.
[vocalizes, gasps]
[Prince Durin IV] A nameless evil.
You mustn't dig!
[King Durin] We have barely taken
a thimble from the ocean of her riches.
Your father, he turned his axe on my men.
You take that army to Eregion now,
and Khazad-dûm
might not be here when you return.
[both grunting]
I'm Estrid.
Fancy you never want
for water on your island.
In Númenor, we have water
in most of our homes.
I'd like to see that.
I wager your betrothed would too.
[Lord Belzagar]
The Valar have deemed her...
[roaring]
- Innocent!
- [people cheering]
Hail Tar-Míriel, Queen of the Sea!
[people] Hail Queen Míriel. Hail!
[groans]
Once the Deceiver obtains a being's trust,
he gains the ability
to sculpt their very thoughts.
[Halbrand] Fighting at your side...
I felt...
I felt it, too.
[Gil-galad]
You have already been affected once.
[Galadriel] Yes.
He knows my mind. And I know his.
Which is why I must face him.
You cannot face him alone.
The High King believes I may be
vulnerable to deception.
And why would he think that?
Stop it, Elrond.
[Celebrimbor] Nine Rings
to enslave the world of Men.
As he... enslaved me.
- [Annatar] I want the Nine!
- [Celebrimbor] No!
They will be far from your reach by now.
Then you are going to bring them to me
and place them in my hand.
[Adar] Together, this crown and your Rings
would be powerful enough
to truly destroy Sauron forever.
[Galadriel] Sauron has no army of his own.
- [in Sindarin] Attack!
- [all shouting]
[Galadriel]
So he's lured yours here instead.
[all shouting]
He wants you to attack Eregion.
This is all his design!
This is what Sauron wants!
- [grunts]
- [groans]
[thunder breaking]
[Prince Durin IV breathing heavily]
- [panting]
- [miner groans]
It's the Ring.
It has him, mind and soul.
Get him to the healing chamber.
What are you gonna do?
No matter what you hear,
do not follow me down that mine.
Durin.
[breathing heavily]
[grunts]
[rumbling]
[thuds]
[Balrog growls]
[grunts]
Take off the Ring!
I said, take it off!
[grunts]
Or I'll take off the whole hand!
You're strong enough to wield an axe.
But are you strong enough to use it
against your father?
No, Father. I'm not.
You've always been stronger than me.
Do you remember when I was a wee lad,
and we'd arm wrestle?
You'd let me lift my hand, just enough,
to think maybe I could win.
And then you'd slam it down again.
And I knew there was nothing stronger
than my father.
Be strong again, Father.
Take it off. I beg you.
A Dwarf... should never beg.
No!
[gasps]
Come and see, my son!
Come and see the true wealth
of our mountain.
Behold.
The dynasty of Durin.
[dramatic music playing]
But to see our mountain the way I do,
you have to wear a ring, my son.
It's not our mountain, Father.
You taught me that.
With these Rings, it could be.
[Balrog growling]
[rumbling]
[Prince Durin IV] Run.
Run, Father!
[gasps, shouts]
[groans]
[roars]
[shouts]
[groans]
[roars]
[King Durin] Durin.
Durin! [panting]
Durin.
[somber music playing]
[chiming]
I never let you lift your hand.
It was you.
Just you. Getting stronger.
Forgive me, my son.
King Durin.
[roaring]
[King Durin shouts]
No! No!
[Disa] No!
[clanks]
- [whooshes]
- [rumbling]
[opening theme music playing]
[choral music playing]
[horse chuffs]
[horse grunts]
Huh.
[chiming]
[Dark Wizard]
Manwë promised you would come.
I confess, my patience wavered,
but my faith in you, old friend, did not.
You know me?
[Dark Wizard] Know you? We are as kin.
Five of us, there were.
But you were the one who convinced me
to leave the Uttermost West
for this world,
because you knew none of us
could ever hope to defeat Sauron alone.
But I was told you wish
to ally yourself with Sauron.
You journeyed to Rhûn seeking answers,
old friend.
Follow me. And you shall have them.
Your past, your name.
Even your staff.
I did not make the journey alone.
Two halflings gave me aid.
Yes. Elanor Brandyfoot
and Poppy Proudfellow.
You need not worry.
I have seen to it,
the small ones are safe.
Come!
Poppy! Nori!
[Dark Wizard]
I instructed they were not to be harmed.
[Brânk] They won't be, once you have
given us all that we were promised.
Forgive me, old friend.
I thought these nomads
might help me find you.
I see now I was foolish to place trust
in such low company.
[Brânk] My people were once Kings, wizard.
[whooshes]
- [groans]
- [crashes]
[in Rhûnnic] Go!
Go now!
[Nori, in English] We tried to find you.
My dear friends.
Is he the fella you were looking
for out here all along?
Dark Wizard?
That is a name I do not embrace.
Placed upon me by Men long ago,
out of ignorance and fear of our kind.
I hope my actions today will lead you
to know better of me.
This the sort of action you mean?
You pity him whose blade
was at your throat?
Yes.
Pity will not defeat Sauron.
And if you were to defeat Sauron,
would that suffice?
Or would you seek to become his successor?
Walk with me, and in time,
we will both be his successors.
I would sooner
walk this desert forevermore,
nameless and forgotten.
Then you give me little choice,
old friend.
[Dark Wizard yells]
[rumbling]
[dramatic music playing]
Everybody out!
[Stoors shouting and screaming]
I only hope losing those you care for most
will give you a taste of the suffering
all Middle-earth will know,
should Sauron prove victorious.
No!
When your senses have returned,
I will be waiting.
[Stoors screaming]
[tense music playing]
Nori! Nori.
[bells tolling]
We expect answers.
What is the meaning of this?
I was ordered only to gather you here.
I've no answers to give.
[marching footsteps approach]
[crowd murmuring]
Leaders of The Faithful.
I thank you all for coming
at this late hour.
To what end?
We have learned why Míriel
was able to bewitch the sea.
It would seem she has an ally
of cunning powers.
An ally who has already
bruised Númenor once
and is now gathering strength
to make us bleed.
Absurd.
The Sea Queen has no allies
but the Valar who uphold her.
Sauron?
All so-called Faithful are now declared
traitors of Westernesse!
[crowd clamoring]
As of this hour, all loyal Númenóreans
are called upon to oppose this threat.
[screams]
[sobbing]
[grunts]
Traitor!
[man] Pharazôn, you cannot do this!
[guard] Come on, traitor.
[clamoring]
Father!
Father, please.
There's no time to explain.
They're coming for you.
Check in there. Clear them out.
[guard shouting]
Are there any Faithful in there?
No. Move along.
[guard 1] Hm.
Shall I tell Ar-Pharazôn
of your insolence?
[guard 2] Do not resist.
Don't push back. Move!
Move along.
[guard 1] Hm.
Right. All of them.
And up there too. All of it.
[Elendil] We must leave for the West.
There are Faithful there.
My son Anárion amongst them.
I know a ferryman
who can get us outside the city.
You must travel only by night.
The stars shall be your friends
and make safe your steps.
[Elendil] And yours.
One does not need eyes
to lead in the dark.
What cowardice have I ever shown
to make you think
I would even consider
making safe my own skin
at the peril of yours?
My place is here. You know it is.
Then where is mine, if not with you?
It is called Narsil.
[Elendil] The white flame.
Reclaim your Lordship.
And with this sword, your destiny.
[blade swishes]
[whooshing]
[coughing]
[grunts, groans]
[shouting]
[grunting]
[groans, screams]
[speaking Sindarin]
[grunts]
[groans]
[shouting]
[Galadriel, in English] Go!
There's no way out, Elf. [groans]
[Galadriel] This way.
[girl] Mama.
[panting]
[shouting]
[gasping]
I'm the one your Lord-father wants.
Set them free. And I will go willingly.
Give me one reason, Elf.
[Orc chuckles]
I will give you Nine.
[bowstring draws]
[groans, shuddering]
[bow clatters]
[shuddering]
[Sauron] Look what you have done
to yourself.
[shuddering]
[explosion in distance]
They will be here any moment.
Have you ever seen Orcs
in the heat of combat?
A frenzy comes over them.
A blood-hunger.
When Gondolin fell,
they say it went on, and on.
[whimpering]
For weeks.
Tell me where you have hidden the Rings.
And I will end your suffering now.
[Celebrimbor] It must be nearly noontide.
One used to hear the kingfishers,
flying to the river.
It is a pity how you have silenced them.
All I have done has been for you.
Yours was the fire
that crafted the marvels of the age.
I wish only to share them with the world.
Please.
Let me.
But the Rings are beyond your reach.
As I shall be, ere long.
For soon I shall go
to the shores of the morning.
Borne hence,
by a wind that you can never follow!
[whimpers]
There are ways of keeping you alive.
[in Sindarin] Friend.
[in English] Must I show you my mastery
of that craft as well?
Craft. [chuckles]
Your only craft is treachery.
So pure, it shall betray
the very hand that forges it.
Your words are empty.
No.
No, hear me. Hear me!
Shadow of Morgoth.
Hear the dying words of Celebrimbor.
The Rings of Power shall destroy you.
And in the end, I foresee,
one alone shall prove your utter ruin!
[shouts]
[groans]
You're wrong. I am their creator.
I am their master.
No.
You are their... prisoner.
Sauron, Lord...
...of the Rings.
Are you him? Are you Sauron?
I have many names.
What is yours, Uruk?
[gasps]
[birds chirping]
[indistinct chatter]
Ill fortune... to pack a dagger in a bag.
Say it cuts a journey short.
This one's already stabbed me once.
I'd wager the damage is done.
How do you live with it?
Had a good healer stitch me up.
I meant, 'bout your mum.
I heard what you said.
About it being your fault and all.
I wanted to know how you carry it.
Poorly.
I've carried it poorly.
I didn't realize that until I came here.
Why?
Seems there's grander things here
than I thought.
Enough to make me realize
how small I'd become.
[man] Come help me!
[sighs]
Better start helping them unload.
Sure you won't come with me?
[chuckles]
Like it better being a low man.
I liked it too.
Change your mind?
To replace the ones Theo lent me.
You can, uh, set it up there.
I hear you're building a home.
Hagen started laying the foundation
a few days ago.
When he laid the cornerstone...
he asked the gods to keep our love strong,
as long as the home stood.
I'm happy for you.
I always thought his kindness
was what love felt like.
But when he said it, I felt ill.
I felt like...
Why are you telling me this?
I...
Come with me.
Come with me to Númenor.
Low men of Pelargir. Salutations.
I'm Theo. Son of Bronwyn.
Bring the surveyor's equipment.
Perhaps you didn't hear.
This is Theo. His mother was Bronwyn.
Of course she was. And who are you?
He's the leader of half the colony.
Here to help me uphold the agreement
we made with your Queen.
Agreement's changed.
We'll build the watchtower
in sight of the river.
Fell a few houses if we need to.
It's a disgrace,
the state this place is in.
Is that Kemen?
Isildur?
Your sister will be so pleased
to hear we found you.
I never gave up hope, even when everyone
said there were no survivors left.
There wouldn't be, if not for Berek.
I trust there's room on the ship.
Plenty.
Then one more should be no trouble.
No passage for low men.
I survived an eruption.
My sister's a guild member.
My father,
Post-Captain to Queen-regent Míriel.
Surely an exception can be made.
I'm afraid you're mistaken.
My father is now King.
And yours... is wanted for treason.
It might've been worse.
If I'd had it my way,
the old fool'd be dead.
- [grunts]
- [clamoring]
I saved your life, you miserable--
Shall I have them slaughter the horse?
These people do look hungry.
[sighs]
Disrespect me again, and you really
will be lost to Middle-earth.
Hear this now.
Pelargir is no longer a colony of Númenor
but a fortress for its soldiers.
And I am its Commander.
Any low man wishing to remain here
will deliver a regular allotment of timber
from the surrounding forests
for the construction
of His Majesty's armada.
What about the supplies you promised?
The food for winter?
No timber, no supplies.
But I'm certain that won't be a problem
for you. After all, they're only trees.
- [wind whooshing]
- [birds chirping]
[leaves rustling]
She-Elf turned herself in.
[Adar] Leave us.
Leave us.
I accept your terms, Uruk.
I have what Sauron seeks.
End this slaughter
and I will do as you asked.
I will help you destroy him.
[Adar] How do you expect to destroy Sauron
without your Ring?
It would seem,
even wounds that have endured an age,
can sometimes yet be healed.
Adar.
When last I looked like this,
I was known by another name.
What was it?
A meaningless name. A name I was given.
Adar is the name I earned.
Help me earn it back.
[Nenya chiming]
Take it.
Help me vanquish Sauron with it.
And I swear to you,
I will recall my children to Mordor.
Never to make war on Middle-earth again.
I have slain more of your children
than any Elf alive.
[in Sindarin] I forgive you.
[in English] No more flames,
and no more darkness.
Let this Ring heal the rift
between Elf and Uruk.
[Nenya chiming]
Let us create a lasting peace
in Middle-earth.
Now and forever.
[Glüg groaning]
What happened?
We found Sauron, Lord-father.
He tried to make Glüg betray you,
but he resisted.
So Sauron did this.
The others are pursuing him now.
[Adar] Forgive me, child.
[Glüg groaning]
It's too late.
It is never too late.
Not even for me.
And not for you, my son.
[gasping]
It's too late.
[groaning]
[gasping]
[Orcs shouting]
[Adar groaning]
Galadriel.
[gasping]
- [Orcs shouting]
- [Adar groaning]
[melancholic music playing]
[in Black Speech] My... children...
[in English]
They are not children anymore.
[speaks Black Speech]
[shouting]
[in English] What orders, Lord Sauron?
Raze Eregion.
Leave no Elf alive.
[gasping]
But bring me their leaders.
[Glüg, in Black Speech] Hail Sauron!
- Hail the new Dark Lord!
- [Orc repeating in Black Speech]
Hail Lord Sauron!
[Orcs repeating in Black Speech]
[in English] All this...
was your design from the beginning.
Please. You think too much of me.
The road goes ever winding.
Not even I can see all its paths.
[Nenya chiming]
It is even more beautiful
than Celebrimbor led me to believe.
Give it to me.
[grunting]
Give me your Ring... and the Nine.
It is not my wish to harm you.
Do you wish to heal me?
I wish to heal... all Middle-earth.
As you have Eregion?
[both grunting]
[gasps]
[grunting]
[Orc] Bring it down.
[Orcs shouting]
And pull!
[Orcs cheering]
- No, Uruk!
- No!
That is the full record
of Celebrimbor's works.
The wisdom of all
who ever dwelt in this place.
Its value is beyond jewels or even blood.
Take our lives.
But leave it be, I beg you.
[laughing]
Cowardly traitors!
[grunting]
- [shouting]
- [screaming]
[Orc] Wait!
Lord Sauron wanted their leaders unharmed.
[grunting]
[groans]
Galadriel,
surely you of all Elves must understand
that to find the light,
we must first touch the darkness.
We are not alike. We never were.
It was just another of your illusions.
Not all of it.
Fighting at your side,
I felt, if I could just hold on
to that feeling.
They could no longer distinguish me
from the evil I was fighting.
[grunting]
Are they not the seeds you planted?
[gasps]
[groans]
[panting]
I see you.
[groaning]
I know your mind.
[shuddering]
The door is still open.
The door is shut.
[groans]
[shouting]
[grunting]
[groans]
[shuddering]
[groaning]
I would have placed a crown
upon your head.
I would never have rested
until all Middle-earth
had been brought to its knees,
to worship the light of its Queen.
[groans]
[Galadriel gasping]
The free peoples of Middle-earth
will always resist you.
[groans]
[gasping]
[breathing heavily]
[sword clatters]
[Galadriel breathing raggedly]
The Rings are mine.
[horn bellows]
Dwarves.
[groans]
[grunting]
[Dwarf] Come on. Get off me.
Durin.
[Elf woman] No!
The Prince is in mourning.
[Orc] Move it!
[Sauron] Give me your Ring.
[shuddering]
Galadriel. Your Ring.
You wish to heal Middle-earth?
Heal yourself.
[dramatic music playing]
[grunts]
We are overwhelmed, Lord Sauron.
The Dwarves are securing
the Elves' retreat.
If we pursue, many Uruks-- [groans]
[choking]
[groans]
- [wind blowing]
- [birds cawing]
These are not merely wounds of the body.
Her very immortal spirit is being drawn
into the shadow realm.
[in Quenya]
Galadriel: by the light of the Elder King,
I command all darkness
to depart from thee...
[chiming]
By the light of the Elder King,
I command all darkness
to depart from thee...
[in English] We're losing her.
The darkness is too powerful.
I cannot save her.
[chiming]
I can.
We can.
[chiming]
[indistinct chatter]
[birds chirping]
We'll have to fix it.
After my family...
Mr. Burrows sat me down.
Told me, "Some things can't be fixed.
"Some things lost are lost forever.
"No matter how hard we fight...
"How much it hurts...
"Or how much our hearts yearn...
"To put them back together...
"'Cause this world's so much bigger
than any of us.
"And sometimes the winds blowin'
against us are just too strong.
"At those times," Mr. Burrows said,
"we've just got to accept it.
"What's broke is broke and won't fix.
"And all anybody can do is try
and build something new."
Don't be a stranger now.
Thank you kindly, Grand-Elf.
Huh.
[woman] Why don't you grab something else?
Goodbye, Grand-Elf.
Grandelf?
[Nori] They've never seen an Elf before.
Never even left home before.
Right. I tried to help 'em pack, but...
it's their first migration,
and they haven't the foggiest
what to bring.
And what to leave.
If I had my druthers, we...
We'd walk the wastes of this world.
Eatin' snails and beetles
till the sun run out of days,
but it's high time I walked my path,
and you walked yours.
We are very different creatures, Nori.
When all is said and done.
Not so different at all, if you ask me.
[dramatic music playing]
It was all a test, wasn't it?
Another one of your riddles.
I was meant
to choose friendship over power.
I was meant to help them.
I was meant to find this.
A wizard does not find his staff.
It finds him.
Like his name.
Gandalf.
That's what they're going to call me,
isn't it?
Now let the song begin.
Let us sing together.
[singing] Merry dol derry dol
Ring a ding dillo
Sandflies in the grass
Bees around the willow
Now let the song begin
[both] Let us sing together
Of sun, stars, moon and mist,
Rain and cloudy weather
Light on the budding leaf
Dew on the feather
Wind on the open hills
Bells on the heather
Old Tom Bombadil
Is a merry fellow
Bright blue his jacket is
And his boots are yellow
Reeds by the shady pool
Lilies on the water
Old Tom Bombadil
And the River-daughter
[Narvi] Eregion has fallen.
The survivors have fled
to a valley North of here.
And Elrond?
He led them.
Dispatch word.
Tell him, Khazad-dûm stands ready
to offer aid once more.
We have troubles of our own, my love.
Your father's passing
has left us in a tangle.
The Lords of the Blue Mountains
paid him vast tributes
and they're demanding to collect.
But there's more.
Rumors fly that you were
not your father's preferred heir.
That some of the other Dwarf-lords
are advancing claims.
And, um, your brother
seems to be gathering support.
[Galadriel shuddering]
[wind whooshing]
[birds chirping]
[gasping]
[Gil-galad] Pity.
I've never known you
to be such peaceable company.
I believe I was growing accustomed to it.
[groans]
Rest.
We are safe here.
- What is this place?
- [Elrond] A sanctuary.
Protected... by the Elven Rings.
[sighs]
Commander.
Arondir.
I have gathered the others, High King.
They await your decision.
Sauron's armies are roving across Eriador.
All Middle-earth is within his reach now.
Even Lindon.
We must decide whether to attack
and bring the fight to him...
or to fall back, to prepare our defenses.
The sword or the shield.
[Elrond] Many of Eregion's bravest fell.
The few who survived are all but broken.
In body or spirit.
They have little strength left
with which to fight.
They barely had strength to flee.
What course would you advise,
Commander Galadriel?
[sighs]
I would remember the counsel
of our dear friend, Celebrimbor,
Greatest of Elven-smiths.
And remind our people...
that it is not strength
that overcomes darkness,
but light.
[gasps]
And the sun yet shines.
[indistinct chatter]
[blade swishes]
[crowd cheering]
[closing theme music playing]